Media and Web Development - Fall 2026
ICOM-101-01 / MTEC-617-01
Course Credit: 2.0

Instructor: Max Fishman - maxfishman@alum.calarts.edu

Course Description
This course provides an introduction to practical web development for artists. Each student will learn the basics of HTML and CSS, and how to combine them into a functioning portfolio website. Students will learn how to work with rich media sources, create dynamic animations, and deploy content to the web using free and open source tools. The final project in this course is to have a personal website up and running.

Student Learning Outcomes
Students will learn the tools and technologies behind modern front end web development.
Students will gain the skills needed to represent themselves and their practice through the web.
Materials
Equipment
A computer with internet access
Software
we will install these together as the course progresses
A programming focused text editor of your choice ( I recommend VSCode, Atom, or Sublime Text )
A modern web browser ( Google Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Microsoft Edge )
Node.js
Expected expenses
Purchasing a domain name to use as your website URL is an optional, but strongly encouraged part of this course. Domain name costs vary depending on TLD ( .com, .me, .party, etc ) and some other factors, but most personal website domains come in at under $10 per year.

Schedule
Schedule is subject to change at any time

Week 1 - 9/11
Welcome
Go over syllabus
Web fundamentals
Week 2 - 9/18
Introduction to HTML
Elements and Tags and attributes
Typography
h1 - h6
p
em and strong
Layout
div
span
section, article, figure, nav
Attrubutes with links and images
a and href
img and src
Using Glitch
Homework

Make an account on Glitch
Design and code a "document" with html on glitch
Think about creating a Resume or CV, a simple flier for an event, liner notes for an album, or credits for a film. Go as far and be as creative as you like.
Make sure to use different heading levels with h1 through h6 tags ( at least 2 different heading levels )
use the p tag to format text into paragraphs
divide your content into sections with div, section, or article tags
add emphasis with em and strong tags
Extra Credit : Use an a tag to link to another website
Extra Credit : Use an img tag to display an image
Week 3 - 9/25
Introduction to CSS
Selectors
Tag
Child and sibling selectors
Class and ID attributes
Color
Web colors
Hex codes
rgba()
Font
System
Web fonts
loading from Google fonts
Positioning with CSS Box Model
padding, margin, border
Homework

Fork your assignment from last week ( or start a new project if you like )
Add some CSS to style your HTML
Use the CSS Box model to add padding, margin, or border styles to an element
Change the color or background-color of an element
Change the font of an element from the default
Extra credit : Load a font from google fonts
Use at least one class attribute to selectively style some HTML
If you didn't last week, add an img and a tag to your document
Week 4 - 10/2
Advanced CSS
Positioning and layout
Flex Box
CSS Grid
Background Images
Gifs
Videos
Psuedo-selectors
:hover
:active
:visitied
Embedded content
Vimeo/Youtube
Soundcloud / Bandcamp
Gradients
Transitions and Animations
Homework The things we learned in class this week are a little less linear, so for this assignment feel free to break away from the styled text document idea we have been working with. Try making a landing page, a looping animation, or just experiment and play with every we've learned so far.

Not all techniques will be relevant to all projects, try to use at least 2 of the things we learned this week. Plus anything else you are excited about.

Use flex or grid in your layout
Use a css gradient, or the background-image to add detail
Use a pseudo-selector to add conditional styling to some part of your site
Use a CSS transition to animate an element on :hover
Add a CSS animation to your site
Week 5 - 10/9
Leaving Glitch!
Installing and using a text editor
File Structure
unix path syntax
The stuff glitch hides
head and body tags
style tag
Installing Node.js
Running a development server
Using devtools
Homework

Migrate one of the last two assignments ( something with both HTML and CSS ) out of glitch.
Create an index.html file and a style.css file
Link your style.css file to the index.html with a style tag inside the head element of your html
Submit your work as a .zip file containing both your html and css files
Week 6 - 10/16
Deployment
Github Pages
Dropbox
Netlify
Surge.sh
Buying and linking domains
Homework

Deploy one of your projects to the web
Extra credit : Purchase and link a custom domain
Week 7 - 10/23
From this point onwards the schedule is more open, we may revisit some older material that is still unclear, or push forward and focus on whatever everyone is excited about

Responsive Web Development
Responsive / Mobile First design
Media Queries
CSS Frameworks ( Bootstrap / Material )
Testing for mobile
Dev tools
Simulator
Mobile debugging with Safari
NGrok
Homework Work on your final site. If you want to expand on your previous assignments, GO FOR IT! If you want to start something new, this is a good time to spin that up.

Week 8 - 10/30
Basic Javascript
Selecting elements with jquery
listening for events ( click, hover, key press )
animation ( jquery or anime.js )
Homework Continue working on your final site.

Week 9 - 11/6
Open period
Dig further into topics that are interesting
More Javascript if needed
Homework Continue working on your final site.

Week 10 - 11/13
Workshop time
Free work period to make progress with your final projects
Time to dig into specific issues and go over any key points we missed during the semester
Address road blocks before thanksgiving break
Homework Continue working on your final site.

Week 11 - 11/27
Present final projects
Week 12 - 12/4
Present final projects
Course Policies
All coursework in this course will be graded individually, with a focus on the students progression and growth.
Technical assignments will have clearly marked grading criteria. Each of which must be completed to receive full credit. Where possible, assignments will include extra credit criteria to encourage experimentation and risk taking.
The final project, and the work weeks associated with it, will be graded in the context of the course at large, and the students personal goals.

Final grades will be based on the following breakdown

Attendance: 3 absences will yield an NX grade for the course.
Assignments: 70%
Final Project: 30% - Failure to submit a final project will yield an NC grade for the course.
Units
Undergraduate students should be committing a total of 6 hours per week, including lectures.
Graduate students should be committing a total of 8 hours per week, including lectures.
Time spent outside of class constitutes researching, planning, and executing assignments
In-Class Behavior
Inappropriate, aggressive, or offensive behavior or language, or provocation of conflict will not be tolerated in this class.
If something about the class is making you uncomfortable, please contact your instructor immediately.

Institute Policies
Plagiarism: Plagiarism is the use of ideas and/or quotations (from the Internet, books, films, television, newspapers, articles, the work of other students, works of art, media, etc.) without proper credit to the author/artist. While the argument in a paper can be enhanced by research, students are cautioned to delineate clearly their own original ideas from source material. Students should introduce source material (either quoted or paraphrased); note when the source material ends; and provide citations for source materials using standard documentation formats.

According to CalArts policy, students who misrepresent source material as their own original work and fail to credit it have committed plagiarism and are subject to disciplinary action, as determined by the faculty member, the dean of the student’s school and the Office of the Provost. If you have questions regarding plagiarism or would like direction on how to credit source material, there are reference guides on permanent reserve in the CalArts library. Please contact one of the CalArts reference librarians for more information.

These ideas are just as viable in the world of computer programming. If you use code written by someone else, you must provide attribution by including an authors name and/or url in your code comments!

Students with Disabilities: Students who have documented disabilities and who want to request accommodations should first go to the Student Affairs office in A207. The Office of Student Affairs will meet with students and communicate with their faculty about appropriate classroom accommodations. Students are encouraged to use these procedures early in the semester, so that the proper arrangements can be in place throughout the course.
